README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# gravitas

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Travis-CI Build
Status](https://travis-ci.org/Sayani07/gravitas.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/Sayani07/gravitas)
[![AppVeyor build
status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/Sayani07/gravitas?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/Sayani07/gravitas)
[![Codecov test
coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/Sayani07/gravitas/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/Sayani07/gravitas?branch=master)

<!-- badges: end -->

## Overview

Package `gravitas` provides a tool to examine the probability
distribution of univariate time series across bivariate temporal
granularities using a range of graphics in `ggplot2` through the
following:

  - create multiple-order-up circular or aperiodic temporal
    granularities.

  - categorize pairs of granularities as either *harmony* or *clash*,
    where harmonies are pairs of granularities that aid exploratory data
    analysis, and clashes are pairs that are incompatible with each
    other for exploratory analysis.

  - recommending appropriate probability distribution plots of the time
    series variable across the bivariate granularities based on the
    levels of the bivariate granularities and their interaction.

`gravitas` is not restricted to temporal data. It can be utilized in
non-temporal cases for which a hierarchical structure can be construed
similar to time. The hierarchical structure of time creates a natural
nested ordering. For example, hours are nested within days, days within
weeks, weeks within months, and so on. Similarly, if a periodic nesting
exists for a non-temporal application, `gravitas` can be used to explore
the probability distribution of a continuous random variable.

## Installation

You can install gravitas from CRAN:

``` r
install.packages("gravitas")  
```

You can install the development version from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("Sayani07/gravitas")
```

## Quick look

`gravitas` comes with an interactive webpage, which lets you go through
the different functionalities of this package. To try it, simply use
gravitas::run\_app().

## Features

  - Search for a set of all possible temporal granularities with
    `search_gran()`

  - Build any temporal granularity with `create_gran()`

  - Check if two temporal granularities are harmonies with
    `is_harmony()`

  - Get all possible harmonies with `harmony()`

  - Get recommendations on choosing more appropriate distribution plots
    and advice on the interaction between granularities, number of
    observations available for drawing probability distributions for
    chosen granularities with `gran_advice()`

  - Validate if the created granularity matches your already existing
    column with `validate_gran()`

  - Explore probability distribution across bivariate temporal
    granularities with `prob_plot()`

## Example: temporal case

The probability distribution of energy consumption for ten households
from [customer
trials](https://data.gov.au/dataset/ds-dga-4e21dea3-9b87-4610-94c7-15a8a77907ef/details?q=smart-meter)
can be explored as follows:

### Search for granularities

``` r
library(gravitas)
library(dplyr)
#> Warning: package 'dplyr' was built under R version 3.5.2
library(ggplot2)
#> Warning: package 'ggplot2' was built under R version 3.5.2
library(lvplot)

 smart_meter10 %>%
   search_gran(highest_unit = "week")
#> [1] "hhour_hour" "hhour_day"  "hhour_week" "hour_day"   "hour_week" 
#> [6] "day_week"
```

### Screen harmonies from the search list

``` r
 smart_meter10 %>%
   harmony(
     ugran = "day",
     filter_in = "wknd_wday"
   )
#> # A tibble: 7 x 4
#>   facet_variable x_variable facet_levels x_levels
#>   <chr>          <chr>             <int>    <int>
#> 1 hour_day       hhour_hour           24        2
#> 2 wknd_wday      hhour_hour            2        2
#> 3 wknd_wday      hhour_day             2       48
#> 4 hhour_hour     hour_day              2       24
#> 5 wknd_wday      hour_day              2       24
#> 6 hhour_hour     wknd_wday             2        2
#> 7 hour_day       wknd_wday            24        2
```

### Visualize probability distribution of the harmony pair (wknd\_wday, hour\_day)

Box plots are drawn across hours of the day faceted by weekend/weekday
for a household in the data `smart_meter10` in the package. It is
interesting to see the difference in energy consumption in the early
morning hours (1 am - 7 am) for weekdays and weekends. The interquartile
range is the same in these hours, however, median energy consumption for
these hours is higher for weekends compared to weekdays. The
distribution for the rest of the day is not significantly different for
weekdays and weekends, implying their energy behavior after 7 am remains
more or less similar.

``` r
smart_meter10 %>%
 filter(customer_id == 10017936) %>%
   prob_plot(
     gran1 = "wknd_wday",
     gran2 = "hour_day",
     response = "general_supply_kwh",
     plot_type = "boxplot") +
   scale_y_sqrt() + scale_x_discrete(breaks = seq(0, 23, 3))
```

<img src="man/figures/README-probplot-1.png" width="100%" />

## Example: non-temporal case

`cricket` data set in the package can be explored by explicitly defining
a hierarchy table as follows:

#### Visualize granularities for non-temporal data

Each inning of the match is plotted across facets and overs of the
innings are plotted across the x-axis. It can be observed from the
letter value plot that there is no clear upward shift in runs in the
second innings as compared to the first innings. The variability in runs
increases as the teams approach towards the end of the innings, as
observed through the longer and more distinct letter values.

``` r
library(tsibble)
#> Warning: package 'tsibble' was built under R version 3.5.2
#> 
#> Attaching package: 'tsibble'
#> The following object is masked from 'package:dplyr':
#> 
#>     id
cricket_tsibble <- cricket %>%
 mutate(data_index = row_number()) %>%
 as_tsibble(index = data_index)

 hierarchy_model <- tibble::tibble(
   units = c("index", "ball", "over", "inning", "match"),
   convert_fct = c(1, 6, 20, 2, 1)
 )
 cricket_tsibble %>%
   create_gran(
     "over_inning",
     hierarchy_model
   )
#> # A tsibble: 8,560 x 12 [1]
#>    season match_id batting_team bowling_team inning  over wicket dot_balls
#>     <dbl>    <dbl> <chr>        <chr>         <dbl> <dbl>  <dbl>     <dbl>
#>  1   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     1      0         4
#>  2   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     2      0         2
#>  3   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     3      1         4
#>  4   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     4      0         3
#>  5   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     5      0         3
#>  6   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     6      0         3
#>  7   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     7      1         1
#>  8   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     8      1         3
#>  9   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     9      0         1
#> 10   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1    10      0         2
#> # … with 8,550 more rows, and 4 more variables: runs_per_over <dbl>,
#> #   run_rate <dbl>, data_index <int>, over_inning <fct>
```

``` r

   cricket_tsibble %>%
   filter(batting_team %in% c("Mumbai Indians",
                              "Chennai Super Kings"))%>%
   prob_plot("inning", "over",
   hierarchy_model,
   response = "runs_per_over",
   plot_type = "lv")
```

<img src="man/figures/README-cricket-1.png" width="100%" />

## More information

View the [vignette](https://sayani07.github.io/gravitas/) to get
started\!

This package takes tsibble as the data input. Tsibble provides a data
class of tbl\_ts to represent tidy temporal data. It consists of a time
index, key and other measured variables in a data-centric format, which
makes it easier to work with temporal data. To learn more about it,
please visit <https://tsibble.tidyverts.org/>

## Acknowledgements

Thanks to PhD supervisors [Prof. Rob J
Hyndman](https://robjhyndman.com/), [Prof. Dianne
Cook](http://dicook.org/) and [Google Summer of
Code 2019](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/) mentor [Prof. Antony
Unwin](http://rosuda.org/~unwin/) for their support and always leading
by example. The fine balance of encouraging me to work on my ideas and
stepping in to help when I need has made the development of this package
a great learning experience for me.

Moreover, I want to thank my cohort at
[NUMBATS](https://www.monash.edu/news/articles/team-profile-monash-business-analytics-team),
Monash University, especially [Mitchell
O’Hara-Wild](https://www.mitchelloharawild.com/) and [Nicholas
Spyrison](https://github.com/nspyrison) for always lending an ear and
sharing their wisdom and experience of developing R packages, with such
kindness.

## Reporting and issues

Please submit all bug reports, errors, and feature requests to
<https://github.com/Sayani07/gravitas/issues>

Commit message:

CRAN badge added and some minor change in cricket vignette

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# gravitas

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Travis-CI Build
Status](https://travis-ci.org/Sayani07/gravitas.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/Sayani07/gravitas)
[![AppVeyor build
status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/Sayani07/gravitas?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/Sayani07/gravitas)
[![Codecov test
coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/Sayani07/gravitas/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/Sayani07/gravitas?branch=master)
[![CRAN Status
Badge](http://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/gravitas)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=gravitas)

<!-- badges: end -->

## Overview

Package `gravitas` provides a tool to examine the probability
distribution of univariate time series across bivariate temporal
granularities using a range of graphics in `ggplot2` through the
following:

  - create multiple-order-up circular or aperiodic temporal
    granularities.

  - categorize pairs of granularities as either *harmony* or *clash*,
    where harmonies are pairs of granularities that aid exploratory data
    analysis, and clashes are pairs that are incompatible with each
    other for exploratory analysis.

  - recommending appropriate probability distribution plots of the time
    series variable across the bivariate granularities based on the
    levels of the bivariate granularities and their interaction.

`gravitas` is not restricted to temporal data. It can be utilized in
non-temporal cases for which a hierarchical structure can be construed
similar to time. The hierarchical structure of time creates a natural
nested ordering. For example, hours are nested within days, days within
weeks, weeks within months, and so on. Similarly, if a periodic nesting
exists for a non-temporal application, `gravitas` can be used to explore
the probability distribution of a continuous random variable.

## Installation

You can install gravitas from CRAN:

``` r
install.packages("gravitas")  
```

You can install the development version from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("Sayani07/gravitas")
```

## Quick look

`gravitas` comes with an interactive webpage, which lets you go through
the different functionalities of this package. To try it, simply use
gravitas::run\_app().

## Features

  - Search for a set of all possible temporal granularities with
    `search_gran()`

  - Build any temporal granularity with `create_gran()`

  - Check if two temporal granularities are harmonies with
    `is_harmony()`

  - Get all possible harmonies with `harmony()`

  - Get recommendations on choosing more appropriate distribution plots
    and advice on the interaction between granularities, number of
    observations available for drawing probability distributions for
    chosen granularities with `gran_advice()`

  - Validate if the created granularity matches your already existing
    column with `validate_gran()`

  - Explore probability distribution across bivariate temporal
    granularities with `prob_plot()`

## Example: temporal case

The probability distribution of energy consumption for ten households
from [customer
trials](https://data.gov.au/dataset/ds-dga-4e21dea3-9b87-4610-94c7-15a8a77907ef/details?q=smart-meter)
can be explored as follows:

### Search for granularities

``` r
library(gravitas)
library(dplyr)
#> Warning: package 'dplyr' was built under R version 3.5.2
library(ggplot2)
#> Warning: package 'ggplot2' was built under R version 3.5.2
library(lvplot)

 smart_meter10 %>%
   search_gran(highest_unit = "week")
#> [1] "hhour_hour" "hhour_day"  "hhour_week" "hour_day"   "hour_week" 
#> [6] "day_week"
```

### Screen harmonies from the search list

``` r
 smart_meter10 %>%
   harmony(
     ugran = "day",
     filter_in = "wknd_wday"
   )
#> # A tibble: 7 x 4
#>   facet_variable x_variable facet_levels x_levels
#>   <chr>          <chr>             <int>    <int>
#> 1 hour_day       hhour_hour           24        2
#> 2 wknd_wday      hhour_hour            2        2
#> 3 wknd_wday      hhour_day             2       48
#> 4 hhour_hour     hour_day              2       24
#> 5 wknd_wday      hour_day              2       24
#> 6 hhour_hour     wknd_wday             2        2
#> 7 hour_day       wknd_wday            24        2
```

### Visualize probability distribution of the harmony pair (wknd\_wday, hour\_day)

Box plots are drawn across hours of the day faceted by weekend/weekday
for a household in the data `smart_meter10` in the package. It is
interesting to see the difference in energy consumption in the early
morning hours (1 am - 7 am) for weekdays and weekends. The interquartile
range is the same in these hours, however, median energy consumption for
these hours is higher for weekends compared to weekdays. The
distribution for the rest of the day is not significantly different for
weekdays and weekends, implying their energy behavior after 7 am remains
more or less similar.

``` r
smart_meter10 %>%
 filter(customer_id == 10017936) %>%
   prob_plot(
     gran1 = "wknd_wday",
     gran2 = "hour_day",
     response = "general_supply_kwh",
     plot_type = "boxplot") +
   scale_y_sqrt() + scale_x_discrete(breaks = seq(0, 23, 3))
```

<img src="man/figures/README-probplot-1.png" width="100%" />

## Example: non-temporal case

`cricket` data set in the package can be explored by explicitly defining
a hierarchy table as follows:

``` r
library(tsibble)
#> Warning: package 'tsibble' was built under R version 3.5.2
#> 
#> Attaching package: 'tsibble'
#> The following object is masked from 'package:dplyr':
#> 
#>     id
cricket_tsibble <- cricket %>%
 mutate(data_index = row_number()) %>%
 as_tsibble(index = data_index)

 hierarchy_model <- tibble::tibble(
   units = c("index", "ball", "over", "inning", "match"),
   convert_fct = c(1, 6, 20, 2, 1)
 )
 cricket_tsibble %>%
   create_gran(
     "over_inning",
     hierarchy_model
   )
#> # A tsibble: 8,560 x 12 [1]
#>    season match_id batting_team bowling_team inning  over wicket dot_balls
#>     <dbl>    <dbl> <chr>        <chr>         <dbl> <dbl>  <dbl>     <dbl>
#>  1   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     1      0         4
#>  2   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     2      0         2
#>  3   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     3      1         4
#>  4   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     4      0         3
#>  5   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     5      0         3
#>  6   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     6      0         3
#>  7   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     7      1         1
#>  8   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     8      1         3
#>  9   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1     9      0         1
#> 10   2008        2 Chennai Sup… Kings XI Pu…      1    10      0         2
#> # … with 8,550 more rows, and 4 more variables: runs_per_over <dbl>,
#> #   run_rate <dbl>, data_index <int>, over_inning <fct>
```

#### Visualize granularities for non-temporal data

Letter value plot of total runs per over is shown overs of the innings
(x-axis) and innings of the match (facet). It can be observed that there
is no clear upward shift in runs in the second innings as compared to
the first innings. The variability in runs increases as the teams
approach towards the end of the innings, as observed through the longer
and more distinct letter values.

``` r

   cricket_tsibble %>%
   filter(batting_team %in% c("Mumbai Indians",
                              "Chennai Super Kings"))%>%
   prob_plot("inning", "over",
   hierarchy_model,
   response = "runs_per_over",
   plot_type = "lv")
```

<img src="man/figures/README-cricket-1.png" width="100%" />

## More information

View the [vignette](https://sayani07.github.io/gravitas/) to get
started\!

This package takes tsibble as the data input. Tsibble provides a data
class of tbl\_ts to represent tidy temporal data. It consists of a time
index, key and other measured variables in a data-centric format, which
makes it easier to work with temporal data. To learn more about it,
please visit <https://tsibble.tidyverts.org/>

## Acknowledgements

Thanks to PhD supervisors [Prof. Rob J
Hyndman](https://robjhyndman.com/), [Prof. Dianne
Cook](http://dicook.org/) and [Google Summer of
Code 2019](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/) mentor [Prof. Antony
Unwin](http://rosuda.org/~unwin/) for their support and always leading
by example. The fine balance of encouraging me to work on my ideas and
stepping in to help when I need has made the development of this package
a great learning experience for me.

Moreover, I want to thank my cohort at
[NUMBATS](https://www.monash.edu/news/articles/team-profile-monash-business-analytics-team),
Monash University, especially [Mitchell
O’Hara-Wild](https://www.mitchelloharawild.com/) and [Nicholas
Spyrison](https://github.com/nspyrison) for always lending an ear and
sharing their wisdom and experience of developing R packages, with such
kindness.

## Reporting and issues

Please submit all bug reports, errors, and feature requests to
<https://github.com/Sayani07/gravitas/issues>
